to continue on positions first position
what do you like about it why do you use
it well first let me tell you a little
story are at positions right in Chicago
I was aware of first second third
position and you know everybody knew
about those when you heard them people
use in those positions and and I thought
that was it you know I ever thought
about it any further than that one night
this is back at Rosen Kelley's blue
lounge again and shakey Horton decides
to sit in he takes a D harp and a C
heart and he puts them back to back like
this and he's home I see he's got these
two harps and he's planned but holding
the microphone and I recognize you know
second position he's playing all this
stuff and then he with a flourish you
know turns it over you know and then
this starts playing this other stuff
that I thought what's that I didn't
because you can your ear becomes
familiar where you can tell what
position so much planned this didn't
sound like anything I'd ever heard
before they make didn't bring a bill so
I got over next to him when he got
through I said what's that other harpy
got he showed me it was a see as if
you're playing in the key of a you want
to see he's yeah I thought wow fourth
position and then even though there was
a fourth position on I thought this was
amazing and about a week later I saw a
little altar in front of the I Spy
lounge on 63rd Street and we're out on
the sidewalk talking as an a Walter I
saw shaky playing in the key of a on a
secret Monica I never heard of such a
thing
and Walter just says all that ain't
nothing you can play it Jana see harp -
you can play IANA see our fifth position
Wow so this got me to thinking if you
can find any opt if it's got to be a run
between those two notes that is some
kind of a run you know right might be
limited and I would that your be playing
in that key that's a great way to think
about yeah if you use that note is your
home center and work out for the see
what works and what don't work and this
use the ones that work you're in that
key so that opens it all up to me about
positions and I remember from time to
time when I would play in fourth or
fifth I would get some kind of step well
you know it's about traditionalist you
know study that's not what to see how go
guys did yeah just because he didn't
record that way or you don't never heard
it on a record from Chicago told me and
they didn't know it and they certainly
did because that's where I learned it
yeah and that's where they opened up my
eyes to you can't take it for it well we
know now today in flames well positions
I can't and don't intend to spend the
time to do it but I love knowing it's
there and even if you can't play in all
those positions I think somehow it helps
you with a better mental image of the
heart and at least know about it it
helps you with with what you already
know the melody for some positions this
seems in lay there right and you find
what position fits the melody the best
like if there's a note and you want to
really hold and put some feeling in and
needs to be a draw note maybe that it's
not a drawn open another position so you
need to have third or fifth to play that
to make it work maybe some blown over on
the other position where okay you're
playing the note but it doesn't have
that same attack or field as it
if you change positions the book
harmonic according to Charlie
Musselwhite I'd have to do a little more
research but you know I've been writing
books for over 20 years now I believe
that was the first book ever to show all
the different positions that can be
played on diatonic harmonica and just
any any thoughts about those early years
of Education and write in the book you
know that's that's that's my thing so
I'm always interested in and kind of
talking to someone who I know you don't
necessarily have a you know a student
body and that type of stuff but you're
obviously interested in the instrument
and you're talking with us and you wrote
that book and there was another book he
wrote with Phil Duncan and that actually
was the reason why I sent my first book
building a harmonica technique so many
years ago to Mel because I saw trout
Musselwhite sitting on the stool I'm
thinking I want to be out with the same
publishing company Charlie muslins with
you no thank you but so you know back
when I was looking for some old wounds
records and jump stores I would also
pick up any music book you know they
were like a nickel or a dime or
something and thought maybe I might find
something learn something and I started
learning a little bit about theory I
learned about the circle of fifths and
learn how that applies to the positions
and that opened up my thinking of that
music you never had a music teacher and
what a music school or nothing I kind of
just taught myself from just reading and
I'm still learning there's no end to
learning mm-hmm so what I learned there
is what applied to me putting that book
together from where I just had taught
myself that's great well I often talk to
people and say what are you doing for
the harmonica
you know we take and we promote
ourselves and do things like that but a
book like that's a great example of
giving back to the community and helping
it to grow well I know that there's guys
that are that want to keep it to
themselves at night you know like girl
hooker was an example is if he would
thought somebody was out in the audience
it was a good guitar player he was safe
always played dummy guitar when somebody
does the turkey is played on a guitar or
he turn his back because he didn't want
people stealing his riffs and stuff yeah
well I always felt like even if you
can't lose anything because you're
always going to be who you are and then
play how you play and your musics always
going to sound like you so why not share
what you know with other people and they
can add to what they know and play like
themselves and and it feels good to show
people how to play better explain
something to them yeah that's a great
spirit yeah why not we're all here out
here together us have a good time all
right we're all in the boat together I'm
pulling for you I'm pulling for you